Since the rise of the COVID-19 pandemic, hospitals have been inundated with COVID patients. As a result of this, patients who might normally seek hospital treatment for less severe illnesses are avoiding hospital treatment out of fear of exposure to the virus in the hospital. My hypothesis was that the number of patients calling EMS with non-critical issues has decreased since March 2020. This lack of hospital treatment can be a cause for collateral deaths as a result of the pandemic. Additionally, I hypothesized that this decrease in calls would be greater in areas that exhibited a greater relative amount of COVID cases, which presumably caused a greater fear of COVID.
In order to test this hypothesis, I used the EMS Incident Dispatch Data (/data/raw/NYC_EMS_Incidents) and data of COVID cases by ZIP code (https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data.page). I compared the number of non-severe EMS calls in March-July 2020 to the corresponding months in 2019. Then, I compared the results from each ZIP code to the relative number of COVID cases in that ZIP code to see if there was a correlation.
First, using an AWK script (makeEMSfiles.awk), I isolated the EMS records from March-July 2019 in one file (EMS2019.gz) and the records from March-July 2020 in another (EMS2020.gz). I selected these records using a regex to match the desired dates. Then, from each one of those files, I selected only the non-severe calls. I determined “non-severe” as follows: each EMS record contains an “initial severity level code” quantifying the severity of the initial call. This is a number between 1 and 9, 1 being most severe. I analyzed the call types of different numbers and decided to classify “non-severe” as anything with a severity code greater than 4. Calls with lower severity codes included cases such as “shot,” “difficulty breathing,” and “seizure.” Calls with higher severity codes were commonly labeled “sick” or “injury.” For each of the 2 smaller EMS files, I created a new file containing the ZIP codes and number of non-severe calls in each ZIP code. This processing was done by a Python program (makeZIPcalls.py) and resulted in the files named calls2019 and calls2020.
In a second Python program (getResults.py), I created a new file (results) combining the 2019 and 2020 data for each ZIP code, along with the relative number of COVID cases in that ZIP code (for only ZIP codes that contained data of all 3 types). I used the COVID data which contained the number of cases per 100,000 people in each ZIP code. The results file contains each ZIP code along with its COVID rates and the ratio of non-severe calls between 2020 and 2019.
Finally, I used Matplotlib (makePlot.py) to create a scatterplot (scatterplot.pdf) of the results. Each point on the scatterplot represents a ZIP code. The x-axis is the number of COVID cases per 100,000 people in that ZIP code, and the y-axis is the ratio of non-severe calls between 2020 and 2019.
From the scatterplot, it is evident that most of the ZIP codes experienced a decrease in non-severe calls, shown by the number of points below the line y=1, indicating that the number of 2019 calls for those ZIP codes was greater than the number of 2020 calls. This supports my initial hypothesis that people have been less likely to call EMS with non-critical issues since the start of COVID. However, my second hypothesis regarding COVID cases was not correct. In fact, there is a slight correlation in the opposite direction: in ZIP codes with a greater relative number of COVID cases, there was less of a decrease in non-severe calls. This does not support the logic that a greater number of cases induces greater fear of hospitalization. Perhaps this can be explained by the fact that there were more people experiencing mild cases of COVID that called EMS with non-severe issues in the ZIP codes with higher COVID rates. It is also logical that ZIP codes with higher COVID rates have greater susceptibility to illness in general.
As this study only accounted for the change in non-severe calls, further study can be done measuring the overall change in calls, using the general trend as a control. 
